.TH ZORVIX 1 "2025" "zorvix 1.3.2" "User Commands"
zorvix \- static HTTP/HTTPS file server with REST routing and cluster support
.B zorvix
.I port
.RB [ \-r | \-\-root
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-l | \-\-log ]
.RB [ \-\-dev ]
.RB [ \-dt | \-\-devtools | \-\-chrome ]
.RB [ \-\-key
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-cert
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zorvix
is a zero-dependency Node.js static file server.
It serves files from a local directory over HTTP or HTTPS, handles
conditional and range requests, compresses responses with gzip when the
client supports it, and optionally registers the served directory as a
Chrome DevTools workspace.
.PP
When run without
.BR \-\-dev ,
.B zorvix
automatically forks a supervised cluster worker.
The primary process acts as a watchdog: if the worker exits unexpectedly it
is restarted after a 500\~ms delay.
Workers that exit cleanly (e.g.\& in response to
.BR SIGINT )
are not restarted.
.PP
.I port
is required and must be the first positional argument.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I port
TCP port to listen on.
Must be a positive integer.
This argument is required and must appear before any option flags.
.TP
.BR \-r " \fIdir\fR, " \-\-root " \fIdir\fR"
Directory to serve files from.
The path is resolved to an absolute path relative to the current working
directory.
Defaults to
.BR $PWD .
Path traversal outside this root is blocked at the file-resolution layer;
any request whose canonicalised path escapes the root receives a
.B 400 Bad Request
response.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log
Enable request logging.
Each incoming request is printed as
.B Client: METHOD URL
before any handler runs.
Cache activity (hits, misses, evictions, and additions), static-file
serving events, gzip compression timings, and significant server events
(start, shutdown) are also printed.
.TP
.BR \-\-dev
Development mode.
Disables the cluster worker and runs the HTTP server in-process.
An uncaught exception causes the process to exit rather than being
suppressed and restarted.
Intended for local development; do not use in production.
.TP
.BR \-dt ", " \-\-devtools ", " \-\-chrome
Enable Chrome DevTools workspace integration.
.B zorvix
serves a randomly-scoped JSON endpoint at
.RS
.PP
.I /.well-known/appspecific/com.chrome.devtools.json
.RE
.IP
The endpoint advertises the workspace root and a UUID.
Connect by opening
.B Sources \(-> Workspace
in Chrome DevTools and clicking
.BR Connect .
The UUID changes on every process start, preventing accidental cross-session
sharing.
.TP
.BR \-\-key " \fIfile\fR"
Path to a PEM-encoded TLS private key.
Must be supplied together with
.BR \-\-cert .
When both are present,
.B zorvix
switches the underlying server to
.BR https.Server .
The default port for HTTPS is 443; the startup log omits the port number
when the bound port matches the protocol default.
.TP
.BR \-\-cert " \fIfile\fR"
Path to a PEM-encoded TLS certificate.
Must be supplied together with
.BR \-\-key .
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version string (e.g.\&
.BR "zorvix 1.3.2" )
and exit with status 0.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit with status 0.
.SH STATIC FILE SERVING
Requests that are not matched by a registered API route fall through to the
static file handler.
The following rules apply.
.SS URL resolution
.IP \(bu 2
The URL path is decoded with
.BR decodeURIComponent (3js).
A malformed percent-escape returns
.BR "400 Bad Request" .
.IP \(bu 2
The root
.B /
and missing paths default to
.BR index.html .
.IP \(bu 2
Paths without a file extension are tried in order with the suffixes
.BR .html ,
.BR .htm ,
.BR .json ,
and
.BR .txt .
The first match that exists on disk is served.
.IP \(bu 2
Resolved paths must remain inside the configured root; any attempt to
escape (e.g.\& via
.BR ../
sequences) returns
.BR "400 Bad Request" .
.SS Caching
Files up to ~8\~MB are cached in memory with their SHA-1
.B ETag
and
.B Last-Modified
timestamps.
Files larger than the cache threshold are read from disk on every request
using a streaming read, with an mtime-based weak ETag.
.PP
Cached entries are evicted after approximately 80\~seconds of inactivity.
.PP
.B If-None-Match
and
.B If-Modified-Since
are honoured; a matching request receives
.B "304 Not Modified"
without a body.
.SS Compression
When the client sends
.B Accept-Encoding: gzip
and the file's MIME type is compressible (HTML, CSS, JavaScript, JSON,
SVG, XML, plain text, etc.), the response is gzip-compressed.
Cached files store the compressed form alongside the raw buffer so that
no per-request compression is needed.
Large files that bypass the cache are compressed on the fly via a streaming
pipeline.
.SS Range requests
.B Accept-Ranges: bytes
is advertised on every file response.
The
.B Range
header is parsed according to RFC\~7233.
Multi-range requests (comma-separated ranges) return
.BR "501 Not Implemented" .
Unsatisfiable ranges return
.BR "416 Range Not Satisfiable"
with a
.B Content-Range: bytes */\fItotal\fR
header.
The
.B If-Range
header is supported; if it does not match the current ETag, the full file
is served instead.
.SS Content-Disposition
Binary and archive MIME types (executables, installers, disk images,
archives, Office documents, etc.\&) are served with
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="..."; filename*=UTF-8''...
.EE
.in
.sp
so that browsers prompt for download rather than attempting to render the
file.
.SS Method handling
Only
.B GET
and
.B HEAD
requests reach the static handler.
Unmatched requests with any other method return
.B "405 Method Not Allowed"
with an
.B Allow
header that lists the methods for which a route is actually registered on
the requested path.
.SH SECURITY
.TP
.B Path traversal prevention
Every resolved file path is checked to ensure it begins with
.I root
followed by the platform path separator.
Requests that escape the root are rejected with
.BR "400 Bad Request" .
.TP
.B URI length limit
URLs longer than 2048\~bytes are rejected with
.BR "414 URI Too Long" .
.TP
.B Header count limit
Requests carrying more than 50 headers are rejected with
.BR "431 Request Header Fields Too Large" .
.TP
.B Connection timeouts
The underlying Node.js server enforces a 10-second timeout for connections
that do not send headers (slow-loris mitigation) and a 60-second timeout for
stalled in-flight requests.
.TP
.B Graceful shutdown
Sending
.B SIGINT
(Ctrl-C) initiates a graceful shutdown: idle connections are closed
immediately and active connections are given 5\~seconds to finish before
being forcibly terminated.
A second
.B SIGINT
forces immediate process exit.
In cluster mode the primary forwards
.B SIGINT
to all worker processes.
.SH CLUSTER MODE
By default (i.e.\& without
.BR \-\-dev ),
.B zorvix
runs in cluster mode.
.PP
The first process to start becomes the \fIprimary\fR.
It forks a single \fIworker\fR which binds to the configured port and
handles all HTTP traffic.
The primary never binds a socket itself; its sole responsibility is
supervising the worker.
.PP
If the worker exits unexpectedly (crash, OOM kill, etc.\&), the primary
waits 500\~ms and forks a new worker.
Workers that exit with
.B SIGINT
or
.B SIGTERM
are considered clean exits and are not restarted.
.PP
When
.B SIGINT
is received by the primary, it broadcasts
.B SIGINT
to all workers and waits for them to exit before terminating.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (includes
.B \-\-help
and
.B \-\-version
).
.TP
.B 1
Argument error (missing or invalid
.IR port ,
missing companion flag for
.B \-\-key
/
.BR \-\-cert ,
etc.\&).
.TP
.B other
Propagated from the cluster worker or the Node.js runtime.
.SH EXAMPLES
Serve the current directory on port 8080:
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
zorvix 8080
.EE
.in
.PP
Serve a specific directory with request logging enabled:
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
zorvix 3000 \-\-root ./dist \-l
.EE
.in
.PP
HTTPS on the standard port:
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
zorvix 443 \-\-key ./certs/server.key \-\-cert ./certs/server.crt
.EE
.in
.PP
Local development — single process, logging, DevTools workspace:
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
zorvix 8080 \-\-dev \-l \-\-devtools
.EE
.in
.PP
Install globally and run via npx:
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
npx zorvix 8080
.EE
.in
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NODE_ENV
Not consumed directly by
.BR zorvix ,
but Node.js itself reads this variable.
.TP
.B PWD
The working directory used as the default static root when
.B \-\-root
is not supplied.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /.well-known/appspecific/com.chrome.devtools.json
Served only when
.B \-\-devtools
is active.
Contains a gzip-compressed JSON object with the fields
.B workspace.root
and
.BR workspace.uuid .
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Node.js 22 or later.
No runtime npm dependencies.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zorvix (3),
.BR node (1),
.BR openssl (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/DanielLMcGuire/Zorvix/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
